whether it's a sublime ballet of
starlings or an unstoppable infantry of
locusts there's no denying that swarming
animals are an astounding sight tens of
thousands of creatures acting with a
single purpose as if with one mind but
just why and how do they do it and is
there such thing as a human swarm
herring gang together in vast schools to
make it easier to feed on their prey
tiny crustaceans called copepods
copepods can jump suddenly sideways in
the water by several centimeters so the
fish in the school are precisely spaced
so that jumping prey sprang out of the
frying pan and into the open mouth of
the herring a swirling seething crowd of
animals can also offer protection from
predators Starling murmur Asians are a
magical sight and they're intangible
ever-changing Beauty arises from a
desperate need to survive the birds are
hunted by peregrine falcons by sticking
together they have thousands of eyes and
ears on the lookout for an attack with
each bird trying to mimic the movements
of its neighbour the result is a flowing
and contorting mass of feathers making
it really hard for falcons to lock onto
any one individual the site of the why
of swarms can be explained by the three
evolutionary urges survive feed and
reproduce but just how they do it isn't
that obvious scientists have been
studying insect swarms to try and find
the answers locusts swarm after periods
of wet weather with millions of
individuals emerging from eggs buried in
the sand they then begin a march and
then a flight that can decimate
vegetation over hundreds of quarters
when there are only a few locusts in an
area they tend to just wander around
changing direction a lot making slow
progress
but when their numbers hit a critical
threshold specifically 74 insects per
square meter they suddenly gain a sense
of purpose and begin at they're
unstoppable March that purpose is one of
survival to avoid getting eaten by their
cannibalistic brothers behind them and
to try take a bite out of the locust in
front of them so locust swarms are
chaotic but there's no swarming more
organized and efficient than that of
army ants who can form three lane
highways and even bridges to get where
they need to go this extraordinary
organization is controlled by just two
instincts follow the trail and don't
bang into your neighbor when a food
source is found an ant Scout lays down a
chemical trail for others to follow the
workers leave the nest sweeping the air
with their antennae to find and follow
the trail but if they're sensitive ant
any brush against another ant they turn
away just enough to avoid a collision
without losing the scent the result is
an organized infantry marching in close
relentless formation all on the basis of
just two orders now while the movements
of army ants might be compared to an
ordered march to battle or a busy
morning commute are these human
activities really swarms there's no
denying that football crowds some of
beachgoers and sales shoppers after
single-minded and sometimes destructive
power of a pestilence swarm but on a
biological level they're fundamentally
different the one factor that keeps a
swarm moving together is the instant
instinctive feedback between each
individual if one moves its neighbor
moves to follow subconsciously humans
simply don't have that instant
subconscious feedback so when one human
moves their neighbor doesn't and things
can get messy rather quickly
so many humans in a room doesn't make a
swarm just a rather chaotic crowd here
at earth unplugged we answer a
fascinating questions about the natural
world
and click here to watch more from me and
let me know what you think in the
comments below also if you're new around
here make sure you subscribe to earth
unplugged